---
title: "High-probability Convergence Bounds for Nonlinear Stochastic Gradient Descent Under Heavy-tailed Noise"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-10-31-heavy-tail-nonlin
date: 2023-10-31
venue: 'arXiv preprint'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18784'
citation: '<b>Armacki, A.</b>, Sharma, P., Joshi, G., Bajović, D., Jakovetić, D., & Kar, S. (2023). High-probability Convergence Bounds for Nonlinear Stochastic Gradient Descent Under Heavy-tailed Noise. arxiv preprint, arxiv:2310.18784.'
---

Abstract: We study high-probability convergence guarantees of learning on streaming data in the presence of heavy-tailed noise. In the proposed scenario, the model is updated in an online fashion, as new information is observed, without storing any additional data. To combat the heavy-tailed noise, we consider a general framework of nonlinear stochastic gradient descent (SGD), providing several strong results. First, for non-convex costs and component-wise nonlinearities, we establish a convergence rate arbitrarily close to $\mathcal{O}\left(t^{-1/4}\right)$, whose exponent is independent of noise and problem parameters. Second, for strongly convex costs and component-wise nonlinearities, we establish a rate arbitrarily close to $\mathcal{O}\left(t^{-1/2}\right)$ for the weighted average of iterates, with exponent again independent of noise and problem parameters. Finally, for strongly convex costs and a broader class of nonlinearities, we establish convergence of the last iterate, with a rate $\mathcal{O}\left(t^{-\zeta} \right)$, where $\zeta \in (0,1)$ depends on problem parameters, noise and nonlinearity. As we show analytically and numerically, $\zeta$ can be used to inform the preferred choice of nonlinearity for given problem settings. Compared to state-of-the-art, who only consider clipping, require bounded noise moments of order $\eta \in (1,2]$, and establish convergence rates whose exponents go to zero as $\eta \rightarrow 1$, we provide high-probability guarantees for a much broader class of nonlinearities and symmetric density noise, with convergence rates whose exponents are bounded away from zero, even when the noise has \emph{finite first moment only}. Moreover, in the case of strongly convex functions, we demonstrate analytically and numerically that clipping is not always the optimal nonlinearity, further underlining the value of our general framework.