---
title: "A One-shot Framework for Distributed Clustered Learning in Heterogeneous Environments"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-02-01-one-shot
date: 2024-02-01
venue: 'IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing'
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10373766'
citation: '<b>Armacki, A.</b>, Bajović, D., Jakovetić, D., & Kar, S. "A One-Shot Framework for Distributed Clustered Learning in Heterogeneous Environments," in IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 72, pp. 636-651, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TSP.2023.3343561.'
---

[Download paper here](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2209.10866.pdf)

Abstract: The paper proposes a family of communication efficient methods for distributed learning in heterogeneous environments in which users obtain data from one of K different distributions. In the proposed setup, the grouping of users (based on the data distributions they sample), as well as the underlying statistical properties of the distributions, are apriori unknown. A family of One-shot Distributed Clustered Learning methods (ODCL-$\mathcal{C}$) is proposed, parametrized by the set of admissible clustering algorithms $\mathcal{C}$, with the objective of learning the true model at each user. The admissible clustering methods include $K$-means (KM) and convex clustering (CC), giving rise to various one-shot methods within the proposed family, such as ODCL-KM and ODCL-CC. The proposed one-shot approach, based on local computations at the users and a clustering based aggregation step at the server is shown to provide strong learning guarantees. In particular, for strongly convex problems it is shown that, as long as the number of data points per user is above a threshold, the proposed approach achieves order-optimal mean-squared error (MSE) rates in terms of the sample size. An explicit characterization of the threshold is provided in terms of problem parameters. The trade-offs with respect to selecting various clustering methods (ODCL-CC, ODCL-KM) are discussed and significant improvements over state-of-the-art are demonstrated. Numerical experiments illustrate the findings and corroborate the performance of the proposed methods.