---
title: "High-probability Convergence Bounds for Online Nonlinear Stochastic Gradient Descent under Heavy-tailed Noise"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-10-21-nonlin-improved
date: 2025-03-21
venue: '28th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13954'
citation: '<b>Armacki, A.</b>, Yu, S., Sharma, P., Joshi, G., Bajović, D., Jakovetić, D., &amp; Kar, S. (2025). <i>High-probability Convergence Bounds for Online Nonlinear Stochastic Gradient Descent under Heavy-tailed Noise.</i> To appear in 28th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.'
---

Abstract: We study high-probability convergence in online learning, in the presence of heavy-tailed noise. To combat the heavy tails, a general framework of nonlinear SGD methods is considered, subsuming several popular nonlinearities like sign, quantization, component-wise and joint clipping. In our work the nonlinearity is treated in a black-box manner, allowing us to establish unified guarantees for a broad range of nonlinear methods. For symmetric noise and non-convex costs we establish convergence of gradient norm-squared, at a rate $$\widetilde{\mathcal{O}}(t^{-1/4})$$, while for the last iterate of strongly convex costs we establish convergence to the population optima, at a rate $$\mathcal{O}(t^{-\zeta})$$, where $\zeta \in (0,1)$ depends on noise and problem parameters. Further, if the noise is a (biased) mixture of symmetric and non-symmetric components, we show convergence to a neighbourhood of stationarity, whose size depends on the mixture coefficient, nonlinearity and noise. Compared to state-of-the-art, who only consider clipping and require unbiased noise with bounded $p$-th moments, $p \in (1,2]$, we provide guarantees for a broad class of nonlinearities, without any assumptions on noise moments. While the rate exponents in state-of-the-art depend on noise moments and vanish as $p \rightarrow 1$, our exponents are constant and strictly better whenever $p < 6/5$ for non-convex and $p < 8/7$ for strongly convex costs. Experiments validate our theory, showing that clipping is not always the optimal nonlinearity, further underlining the value of a general framework.